# Foreword

After a careful analyses, the team behind the Driver Stack Reviews,
concluded that the underlying driver model was too complex. They
did not have the right abstractions, and they were putting too much
burden on the driver developter.

The Windows Driver Model (WDM) grew organically over 14 years of
development and was showing its age. Although WDM is very
flexible and can support many different devices, it has a fairly
low-level of abstraction.

Too many of the rules were not well understood and were extremely
difficult to describe clearly.

After extensive research, data analyses and face-to-face sessions
with driver developers, they initiated the work on the Windows
Driver Foundation (WDF). The goal was to build a next-generation
driver model that met the needs of all device classes.

For WDF, they used a different developmental methodology: They got
external driver developers involved in the design right from
the start by holding design reviews. As soon as they developed the
specifications, they invited developers to a roundtable even before
they started writing code.

WDF went through several iterations as it developed into what it is
today. Based on the feedback received during development, they redid
the Plug and Play and power management implementation as well as the
synchronization logic. In particular, the Plug and Play and power
management implementation was redesigned to use state machines. This
helped to make the operations explicit, so that it was easy to
comprehend the relationships between I/O and Plug and Play. One of
the benefits of using WDF is that every driver automatically gets a
copy of this well-tested, well-engineered Plug and Play  and power
management implementation.

The OCA (Online Crash Analysis) data showed that 85 percent of
unexpected system stops were caused by drivers and not by core
Windows kernel components. Analysis showed that drivers for many
device classes - notably USB, Bluetooth, and 1394 interconnects -
did not need to be in kernel mode. Moving drivers to user mode
has many benefits. For example, crashes in user-mode drivers can
be fully isolated and the system can recover without rebooting.
The programming environment in user mode is considerably simpler
than in kernel mode. Developers have access to many tools and rich
languages to write their code. Debugging is much simpler. A
significant advancement with WDF is that we provice the same driver
model in both user mode and kernel mode.

Although driver model simplifications address many issues that
cause system crashes, they do not address programmer error like
buffer overruns, uninitialized variables, incorrect usage of system
routines - such as completing a request more than once - and so
forth. The work at Microsoft Research (MSR) in the area of static
analysis tools addressed this piece of the puzzle. MSR had developed
prototypes of tools that could understand the rules of a driver
model and formally analyze source code. We decided to turn two of
these ideas into tools that would become part of the Windows Driver
Foundation: Static Driver Verifier (SDV) and PREfast for Drivers
(PFD).

With the release of Windows Vista, both the first version of WDF
and our static tools became available to driver developers in the
Windows Driver Kit (WDK). WDK and the static tools have laid a good
foundation for our driver development platform. The initial release
of Windows Vist included about 17 KMDF (Kernel-Mode Driver Framework)
drivers, covering a wide variety of device classes. In user mode,
both Microsoft Windows Sideshow and Windows Portable Media
technologies support UMDF drivers. Microsoft will continue to build
on this foundation to meet the needs of current and future device
classes.

This book captures the essentials of the WDF frameworks and static
tools, and it makes available for the first time in a single source
for all information related to WDF. The book should help any driver
developer - even a novice - get up to speed quickly on WDF. You will
find that WDF enables you to develop a higher quality driver in
significanly less time than the older driver models.
