# Overview

Windows Driver Foundation (WDF) provides a driver model that makes it
easier to learn and easier to implement robuts Windows drivers. WDF
largely supersedes WDM and is designed to enable developers to focus
on the requirements of their hardware rather than the complexities of
the operating system. WDF also enhances system stability by supporting
the ability to create drivers that run in user mode for several
important device categories that previously required kernel-mode
drivers.

With the WDF programming model, a developer can quickly implement a
basic but functional driver, with WDF handling most of the event
processing. The developer can then incrementally expand the scope of
handled events until the driver is fully functional.

This book is designed to introduce WDF to anyone who is interested in
developing Windows drivers, including software programmers with no
previous driver development experience. We wrote this book in
partnership with the WDF development team at Microsoft, who designed
the architecture, built the frameworks, and developed the sample
drivers to guide programmers. This book starts with a high-level
discussion of the WDF architecture and programming model, but most of
it is designed to provide a practical, sample-oriented introduction to
the WDF frameworks for developing Windows drivers.

## What Criteria Was Used to Create WDF APIs?

When the WDF architecture was being designed, the first and ongoing
criterion used for adding an API was if it was a "thin book" or
"thick book" API.

"Thin book" meant it was both a simple API that most driver developers
would use and that its use would be easy to determine based on its
signature alone (such as **WdfDeviceInitSetExclusive**) and the
documentation of it could be included in a short document like a white
paper (hence, "thin").

"Thick book" meant that the API was going to be difficult to understand
or rarely used, requiring the developer to delve deep into the
frameworks.

Under WDF, developing user-mode drivers requires an understanding of
C++, whereas kernel-mode drivers are almost always written in C.
If you are unfamiliar with either language, you should consult any of
the many books on these languages. By building on your knowledge of C
and C++ and your familiarity with Windows programming, this books
provides the concepts, guidelines, programming examples, and tips to
get you started with WDF drivers.


