# Introduction to Algorithm Design

What is an algorithm? An algorithm is a procedure to accomplish a specific task.

An algorithm must solve a general, well-specified problem. An algorithmic problem is specified by describing the complete set of instances it must work on and of its output after running on one of these instances.

> So to have an algorithm, I must know what is the general problem it's trying to solve. For example, searching, ordering, etc. And instances of that problem, e.g.: ordering a string, searching of an integers in an unordered list, etc.

An algorithm is a procedure that takes any of the possible input instances and transforms it to the desired
output. There are many different algorithms for solving the problem of sorting. For example, insertion
sort is a method for sorting that starts with a single element (thus forming a trivially sorted list) and
then incrementally, inserts the remaining elements so that the list stays sorted.

```c
insertion_sort(item s[], int n)
{
	int i, j;

	for (i=1; i < n; i++) {
		while((j > 0) && (s[j] < s[j-1])) {
			swap(&s[j], &s[j-1]);
			j = j-1;
		}
	}
}
```

Note the generality of this algorithm. It works just as well on names as it does on numbers, given the
appropriate comparison operation (<) to test which of the two keys should appear first in sorted order.
It can be readily verified that this algorithm correctly orders every possible input instance according to our
definition of the sorting problem.

There are three desirable properties for a good algorithm. We seek algorithms that are **correct** and **efficient**, while being **easy to implement**. These goals may not be simultaneously achievable. In
industrial settings, any program that seems to give good enough answers without slowing the application down
is often acceptable, regardless of whether a better algorithm exists. The issue of finding the best
possible answer to achieving maximum efficiency usually arises in industry only after serious performance
or legal troubles.

## Robot Tour Optimization

The quest for an efficient algorithm to solve the `traveling salesman problem` will take us through much of this book.

There is a fundamental difference between algorithms, which always produce a correct result, and
heuristics, which may usually do a good job but without providing any guarantee.

Always try to consider this format for creating an algorithm:

*Problem:* Scheduling Problem
*Input:* A set I of n intervals on the line
*Output:* Largest subset of mutually non-overlapping intervals which can be selected from I

Ensuring the optimal answer over all possible inputs is a difficult but often achievable goal.
Seeking counterexamples that break pretender algorithms is an important part of the algorithm
design process. Efficient algorithms are often lurking out there; this study seeks to develop
my skills to help me find them.

Think about this: Reasonable-looking algorithms can easily be incorrect. Algorithm correctness
is a property that must be carefully demonstrated.

## Reasoning about Correctness

The previous two examples have really opened my eyes to how subtle algorithm correctness can be.
So to be able to tell correct and incorrect algorithms apart I will need tools to help me, and
the primary tool for the job is *proof*.

There are several parts to a proper mathematical proof. There first one will be a clear and
precise statement of what it is that I'm trying to prove. The second will be those things
(assumptions) that are already taken to be true and are often used as part of the proof.
The third part will a chain of reasoning which go from the assumptions in part two to the
statement that I'm trying to prove. Finally, there is a little square (█) or QED at the bottom
to denote that I have finished, representing the Latin phrase for "thus it is demonstrated".

A proof is a demonstration. Proofs are only useful if they are honest.

Correct algorithms require careful exposition, and efforts to show both correctness and *not
incorrectness*.

### Expressing Algorithms

Reasoning about an algorithm is impossible without a careful description of the sequence of
steps to be performed.

> So to be able to think and analyze and reason about an algorithm I need to have a clear,
> careful description of the sequence of steps.
> So what do I need to be able to reason about an algorithm's correctness? I need a careful
> outline of its steps.

The three most common forms of algorithmic notation are Englisn, pseudocode, a real
programming language.

> Pseudocode may sound mysterious but it's just a language that never complains about syntax errors

All three methods are useful because there is a natural tradeoff between greater ease of
expression and precision.

The heart of any algorithm is an idea. If your idea is not clearly revealed when you express
an algorithm, then you are using too low-level a notation to describe it.

