# Preface

Most professional programmers that I've encountered are not well prepared to
tackle algorithm design problems. This is a pity, because the techniques of
algorithm design form one of the core practical technologies of computer
science. Designing correct, efficient, and implementable algorithms for
real-world problems requires access to two distinct bodies of knowledge:

* Techniques - Good algorithm designers understand several fundamental
  algorithm design techniques, including data structures, dynamic programming,
  depth-first search, backtracking, and heuristics. Perhaps the single most
  important design technique is modeling, the art of abstracting a messy
  real-world application into a clean problem suitable for algorithmic attack.

* Resources - Good algorithm designers stand on the shoulders of giants.
  Rather than laboring from scratch to produce a new algorithm for every task,
  they can figure out what is known about a particular problem. Rather than
  re-implementing popular algorithms from scrath, they seek existing
  implementations to server as a starting point. They are familiar with many
  classic algorithmic problems, which provide sufficient source material to
  model most any application.

This book is intended as a manual on algorithm design, providing access to
combinatorial algorithm technology for both students and computer professionals.
It is divided into two parts: Techniques and Resources. The former is a general
guide to techniques for the design and analysis of computer algorithms. The
Resources section is intended for browsing and reference, and comprises the
catalog of algorithmic resources, implementations, and an extensive bibliography.

## To The Reader

* The Catalog of Algorithmic Problems - Since finding out what is known about
  an algorithmic problem can be a difficult task, I provide a catalog of the
  75 most important problems arising in practice. By browsing through this
  catalog, the student or practitioner can quickly identify what their problem
  is called, what is known about it, and how they should proceed to solve it.
  To aid in problem identification, we include a pair of "before" and "after"
  pictures for each problem, illustrating the required input and output
  specifications.
  The catalog is the most important part of this book. To update the catalog
  for this edition, I have solicited feedback from the world's leading experts
  on each associated problem. Particular attention has been paid to updating the
  discussion of available software implementations for each problem.
* 
