# Packages and Crates

A crate is the smallest amount of code that the Rust compiler considers at a time. Crates can contain modules, and the modules may be defined in other files that get compiled with the crate, as we'll see in the coming sections.

A crate can come in one of two forms: a binary crate or a library crate. Binary crates are programs you can compile to an executable that you can run, such as a command-line program or a server. Each must have a functions called `main` that defines what happens when the executable runs.

Library crates don't have a `main` function, and they don't compile to an executable. Instead, they define functionality intended to be shared with multiple projects. Most of the time when Rustaceans say "crate", they mean library crate, and the use "crate" interchangeably with the general programming concept of a "library".

The crate root is a source file that the Rust compiler starts from and makes up the root module of your crate.

A package is a bundle of one or more crates that provide a set of functionally. A package contains a Cargo.toml file that describes how to build those crates. Cargo is actually a package that contains the binary crate for the command-line tool you've been using to build your code. The Cargo package also contains a library crate that the binary crate depends on.

A package can contain as many binary crates as you like, but at most only one library crate. A package must contain at least one crate, whether that's a library or a binary crate.

Let's walk through what happens when we create a package. First, we enter the command `cargo new`:

```bash
$ cargo new my-project
	Created binary (application) `my-project` package
$ ls my-project
Cargo.toml
src
$ ls my-project/src
main.rs
```

In the project directory, there's a `Cargo.toml` file, giving us a package. There's also a `src` directory that contains `main.rs`. Cargo follows a convention that `src/main.rs` is the crate root of a binary crate with the same name as the package. Likewise, Cargo knows that if the package directory contains `src`