# Behavioral Questions

These are asked because they want to know your personality, and get a better understanding of
your resume.

## Interview Preparation Grid

Go through each of the projects or components of your resume and ensure that you can talk about them in detail. Filling out a grid like this may help:

* Project 1:
  * Chanllenges
  * Mistakes/Failures
  * Enjoyed
  * Leadership
  * Conflits
  * What you'd do differently / Lessons learned
* Project 2:
* etc.

Reducing each story to just a couple of keywords may make the grid easier to study and recall.

Ensure that you have one to three projects that you can talk about in detail. You should be able to discuss the technical components in depth. These should be projects you played a central role.

## What questions should you ask the interviewer?

Three general types of questions:

* Genuine questions
  * These are questions you actually want to know the answers to
    * What is the ration of testers to developers to program managers?
    * What is the interactions like?
    * What brought you to this company and what has been most challenging for you?
* Insightful questions
  * These questions demonstrate your knowledge or understanding of technology
    * I noticed that you used technology X. How do you handle problem Y?
    * Why was X protocol chosen over Y protocol? I know it's good because of A, B, C, but many companies choose not to use it because of program D.
* Passion Questions
  * These questions are designed to demonstrate your passion for technology. They show that you're interested in learning and will be a strong contributor to the company.
    * I'm very interested in scalability and would love to learn more about it. What opportunities are there at this company to learn about this?
    * I'm not familiar with technology X, but it sounds like a very interesting solution. Could you tell me a bit more about how it works?

## Know your technical projects

Select two or three projects that you have deeply mastered.

* The project had challenging components (beyond just "learning a lot")
* You played a central role
* You can talk at technical depth

For those projects, and all your projects, be able to talk about the challenges, mistakes, technical decisions, choices of technologies (and tradeoffs of these), and things you would do differently.

Also think of follow-up questions like: "How would you scale that application?"

## Responding to behavioral questions

### Be Specific, Not Arrogant

Give facts, and let the interviewer understand that you were really good

### Limit Details

Too many details may be confusing for the interviewer. Give the key points:

> By examining the most common user behavior and applying the Rabin-Karp algorithm, I designed a new algorithm to reduce search from O(n) to O(log n) in 90% of cases. I can go into mode details if you'd like

### Focus on yourself, not your team

They are hiring you, not your team

### Give Structured Answers

S.A.R. (Situation, Action, Result)

## So tell me about yourself

Walk through your resume and nail this.

### Structure

1. Current Role: "I'm a software engineer at X, where I've been leading the Android team for the last five years"
2. College: My background is in systems development and analysis. During that time I worked as a software developer intern at ExxonMobil.
3. Post College & Onwards: I wanted to get some exposure to hands-on software development so I joined Sanepar as a developer. It was a great experience. I learned a ton about web, mobile, and enterprise applications and had the change to redesign and code an entire application for HR.
4. Current Role (details): ExxonMobil reached out to me again asking if I wanted to joing their new Software Security Group as a software engineer. I was excited about the opportunity and decided to join them. There I had the chance to lead the development of a SAST application, and several other interesting projects.
5. I always wanted to move to an English-speaking nation, so when Plurilock reached out to me with the opportunity to move to Canada and lead the development of their desktop app I was really interested.
6. Outside of work I am developing an open-source project to track and develop habits. It's in Rust as that is one of the languages I have been really interested in because of its safe type system.
7. But I have looking for an opportunity to work with and your company caught my eyes.

## Hobbies

Think carefully about your hobbies. You may or may not want to share them.

Often they're just fluff.

It's OK if the hobbie is technical (like IoT), hobbies that show positive personality attributes.

## Sprinkle in shows of successes

Can you drop in shows of sucesses? awards, promotions, being recruited out by someone you worked with, launches, etc.
