# .NET Layout

```bash
$/
	artifacts/
	build/ (or pipeline)
	docs/
	lib/
	packages/
	samples/
	src/
	tests/
	.editorconfig
	.gitignore
	.gitattributes
	build.cmd
	build.sh
	LICENSE
	NuGet.Config
	README.md
	{solution}.sln
```

* `src` - Main projects (the product code)
* `tests` - Test projects
* `docs` - Documentation, Markdown files, help files, etc.
* `samples` (optional) - sample projects
* `lib` - Things that can NEVER exist in a NuGet package
* `artifacts` - Build outputs go here. Doing a build.cmd/build.sh generates artifacts here (nupkgs, dlls)
* `packages` - NuGet packages
* `build or pipeline` - Build customizations (custom msbuild files/psake/fake/albacore/etc) scripts
* `build.cmd` - Bootstrap the build for Windows
* `build.sh` - Boostrap the build for *nix

Inside the `src` folder, the truth is that there isn't a single correct way to organize your code. But, numerous open source repositories show that they actually share some common patterns and practices when
it comes to organizing the code.

## Project naming

Some common practices for naming projects include:

* CompanyName.ProductName.Component (e.g. MyCompany.MyApp.DataAccess)
* CompanyName.Component
* ProductName.Component

Once you've chosen your particular naming convention, it's important to remain consistent with it.

## Namespaces

In the case of subfolders withing the same project, the namespaces of the files withing the subfolders
reflect the same hierarchical structure. For example, in a MyApp.DataAccess project, classes withing
SqlServer folder would belong to a MyApp.DataAcces.SqlServer namespace.

## Project separation

One way to group code into multiple project is by major functionality. For example, everything related to
math operations in an application could go in its own project, separate from UI or data access components.

Another common approach is to divide the application into layers, creating a separate project for each
layer. This helps you manage dependencies and avoid circular references, so that each layer is visible
only to the correct projects. As an example, think of creating a project for the UI layer, that
references the Business logic layer, that in turn references the Data access layer; this creates a clear
separation between those different areas of the applications.

And then within the same project it is possible to create additional groupings, putting classes and
components with similar functionalities into subfolders.

Example:

```bash
$/
	MyApp.sln
	src/
		MyApp.UI/
			MyApp.UI.csproj
		MyApp.Math/
			MyApp.Math.csproj
		MyApp.Business/
			MyApp.Business.csproj
		MyApp.DataAccess/
			SqlServer/
				SqlServerRepository.cs
			Mock/
				MockRepository.cs
			IRepository.cs
			MyApp.DataAccess.csproj
	tests/
		MyApp.Math.Tests/
			CalculatorTests.cs
			MyApp.Math.Tests.csproj
			Utilities/
				MathUtilitiesTest.cs
```