# The Interview Process

At the largest tech companies, most of the interview process will be composed of algorithm and coding problems.
What are they looking for? They want to evaluate my ability to solve algorithmic problems you haven't seen before.

So the interviews at big tech companies aim at finding out if an interviewee is capable of solving algorithmic problems they haven't seen before.

You should do your best to explain your thought process.

* Analytical skills:
  * Did you need much help solving the problem?
  * How optimal was your solution?
  * How long did it take you to arrive at that solution?
  * Did you consider all trade-offs?
* Coding skills: reasonable, clean, organized, good style code
* Experience
* Culture fit / Communication skills

In a standard algorithm question, only the first three might matter.

## Why are coding interviews like that?

### False negatives are acceptable

This is sad (and frustrating for candidates), but true.

From the company's perspective, it's acceptable to miss out on some good people. They are far more concerned with false positives: people who do well in an interview but are not in fact very good.

### Problem-solving skills are valuable

If you're able to work through several hard problems, you're probably very good at developing optimal algorithms. You're smart.

### Basic data structure and algorithm knowledge is useful

Basic computer science knowledge is useful. Understanding trees, graphs, lists, sorting, and other knowledge does come up periodically. That knowledge is also a good "proxy", they are reasonably well-correlated with being a good developer.

### Whiteboards let you focus on what matters

Focus on solving the problem without worrying about environment.

It is what it is so let's do the best we can with it.
