# Before the Interview

## Get the right experience

* Start Something: Build a project on your own time, participate in hackathons, or contribute to an open source project. It doesn't matter too much what it is. The important thing is that you're coding.
* Shift Work Responsibilities more towards coding.
* Use your nights and weekends. If you have some free time, use it to build a mobile app, a web app, or a piece of desktop software. Doing such projects is also a great way to get experience with new technologies, making you more relevant to today's companies. This project work should definitely be listed on your resume; few things are as impressive to an interviewer as a candidate who built something "just for fun".

## Writing a great resume

My resume must show that I am smart and that I can code.

In the US, it is strongly advised to keep a resume to one page if you have less than ten years of experience.

Think twice about a long resume. Shorter resumes are often more impressive.

## Employment History

Show what you did, how you did it, what the results were. Ideally, you should try to make the results "measurable" somehow.

## Projects

Developing the projects section on your resume is often the bet way to present yourself as more experienced.

What should you build? Honestly, it doesn't matter much. Some employers really like open source projects. You could build a mobile app, a web app, or almost anything.

## Programming languages and software

For software engineering positions it's almost irrelevant to add software like IDEs, DBMS, etc. Do not add office software.

For languages, one alternative is to add your experience level along with the language. For example:

* Languages: C# (expert), Go (proficient), JavaScript (prior experience)

## Beware of potential stigma

### Enterprise languages

VB or .NET as a whole: If not applying to these, you will need to show that you're really able to code in other languages.

### Being too language focused

Be careful to show that you're perfectly capable of using and mastering other languages, even though you've focused on another language so far.

### Certifications

In some cases you will need to remove this from your resume because some companies will assume that you're too technology focused.

### Knowing only one or two languages

When a candidate only knows one or two languages companies tend to question: Why hasn't he learned other things?

Learn more languages. Build projects on different languages.

## Preparation Map

* 1+ Years before the interview
  * Build projects outside of school/worl
  * Learn multiple programming languages
  * Expand network
  * Build website / portfolio showcasing your experience
  * Focus work on "meaty"/coding projects
  * Do LeetCode / Hackerhand
* 3 - 12 Months before the interview
  * Continue to work on projects
  * Try to add on one more project
  * Create draft of resume and send it out for a resume review
  * Make target list of preferred companies
  * Read intro sections of Cracking the Coding Interview
  * Learn and master Big O
  * Implement data structures and algorithms from scratch
  * Form mock interview group with friends to interview each other
* 1 - 3 Months before the interview
  * Do mini-projects to solidify understanding of key concepts
  * Do several mock interviews
  * Continue to practice interview questions
  * Create list to track mistakes you've made solving problems
* 4 Weeks before the interview
  * Create interview prep grid
  * Review / Update resume
  * Begin applying to companies
  * Re-read intro to Cracking the Code Interview, especially Tech & Behavioral section
  * Do another mock interview
  * Continue to practice questions, writing code on paper
* 1 Week before the interview
  * Phone Interview: Locate headset and / or video camera
  * Do a final mock interview
  * Rehearse stories from the interview prep grid
  * Re-read Algorithm Approaches (pg 67)
  * Re-read Big O sections (pg 38)
  * Continue to practice interview questions
* Day before interview
  * Rehearse each story from interview prep grid once
  * Continue to practice questions & review your list of mistakes
  * Review Powers of 2 table (pg 61). Print for a phone screen.
* The Day of the interview
  * Wake up in plenty of time to eat a good breakfast & be on time.
  * Be Confident (Not Cocky)
  * Remember to talk out loud. Show how you think.
  * Don't forget: stumbling and struggling is normal
* After the interview
  * Write Thank You note to recruiter
  * If you haven't heard from recruiter, check in after one week
  * If no offer, ask when you can re-apply. Don't give up hope!
  * Get an offer? Celebrate! Your hard work paid off!
