# 1.1.8 Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions

`Sqrt` is our first example of a process defined by a set of
mutually defined procedures. Notice that the definition of
`sqrt-iter` is *recursive*; that is, the procedure is defined
in terms of itself. The idea of being able to define a
procedure in terms of itself may be disturbing; it may seem
unclear how such a "circular" definition could make sense at
all, much less specify a well-defined process to be carried out
by a computer.

The problem of computing square roots breaks up naturally into
a number of subproblems: how to tell whether a guess is good
enough, how to improve a guess, and so on. The entire `qrt`
program can be viewed as a cluster of procedures that mirror
the decomposition of the problem into subproblems.

```mermaid
graph TD;
    sqrt-->sqrt-iter;
    sqrt-iter-->good-enough;
    sqrt-iter-->improve;
    good-enough-->square;
    good-enough-->abs;
    improve-->average;
```

The importance of this decomposition strategy is not simply
that one is dividing the program into parts. After all, we
could take any large program and divide it into parts.
Rather, it is crucial that each procedure accomplishes an
identifiable task that can be used as a module in defining
other procedures. For example, when we define the
`good-enough?` procedure in terms of `square`, we are able
to regard the `square` procedure as a "black-box". We are not
at that moment concerned with *how* the procedure computes
its result, only with the fact that it computes the square.
The details of how the square is computed can be suppressed,
to be considered at a later time. Indeed, as far as the
`good-enough?` procedure is concerned, `square` is not quite
a procedure but rather an abstraction of a procedure, a
so-called *procedural abstraction*. At this level of abstraction,
any procedure that computes the square is equally good.