# Designing Your Web Application in Rust

To build a standalone script, you can create a file with the extension `.rs`, type in your
Rust code in it and compile it with `rustc`. For example:

Create a file:

```bash
vim hello_rob.rs
```

Type in some Rust code:

```rust
fn main() {
	println!("Hello, Rob!");
}
```

Compile it:

```bash
rustc hello_rob.rs
```

Run it:

```bash
$ ./hello_rob

Hello, Rob!
```

This approach is not recommended for managing programs spanning multiple files. It is not even
recommended when relying on dependencies. This is where Cargo comes in. Cargo manages everything -
the running, testing, documentation, building, and dependency - out of the box with a few simple
commands.

## Building with Cargo

Navigate to a directory where you want to build your project and run:

```bash
cargo new web_app
```

This builds a basic structure for our app with the following directory:

```bash
____web_app/
    |__ Cargo.toml
    |__ src/
		|__ main.rs
```

The `src` directory is where we will house our code for the program. The point
for the program is in the `main.rs` file. In development, we want to run
`Cargo.toml` file is where metadata around the program is defined, and the entry
the program multiple times with incremental changes:

```bash
cargo run
```

This compiles code in an unoptimized manner with debug information in the newly
created `./target/debug` directory under the binary `web_app`. Once the
compilation process has been completed, it runs in the console directly. If we
want to build a release, we simply run the following command:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

This compiles an optimized version of our app in the `./target/release/`
directory under the binary `web_app`.

## Shipping crates with Cargo

Third-party libraries are referred to as crates. Let's explore the `rand` crate,
available at [https://rust-random.github.io/rand/rand/index.html]. To use this
crate in our project, we open the `Cargo.toml` file and add `rand` crate under
the `[dependencies]` section.

```toml
[dependencies]
rand = "0.7.3"
```

Now we can use it:

```rust
use rand::prelude::*;

fn generate_float(generator: &mut ThreadRng) -> f64 {
	let placeholder: f64 = generator.gen();
	return placeholder * 10.0
}

fn main() {
	let mut rng: ThreadRng = rand::thread_rng();

	let random_number = generate_float(&mut rng);
	println!("{}", random_number);
}
```

## Documenting with Cargo

We can define markdown language within the Rust file with the following:

```rust
/// This function generates a float number using a number
/// generator passed into the function.
///
/// # Arguments
/// * generator (&mut ThreadRng): the random number
/// generator to generate the random number.
///
/// # Returns
/// (f64): random number between 0 -> 10
fn generate_float(generator: &mut ThreadRng) -> f64 {
	let placeholder: f64 = generator.gen();
	return placeholder * 10.0
}
```

## Interacting with Cargo

In order to enable our program to have some flexibility depending on the
context, we need to be able to pass parameters into our program and also keep
track of the parameters in which the program is running. We do this using the
`std` (standard library) keyword:

```rust
use std::env;
let args: Vec<String> = env::args().collect();
println!("{:?}", args);
```

What happens here is that we collect the arguments from the environment and
print them utilizing the debug operator.

```rust
let path: &str = &args[0];

if path.contains("/debug/") {
	println!("The development app is running");
}
else if path.contains("/release/") {
	println!("The production app is running");
}
else {
	panic!("The setting is neither debug or release");
}
```

## Structuring Code

Structuring code is an important part of developing any web app. Because of
this, we have to get comfortable breaking down a problem into components that
Rust can manage and execute. Let's learn how to build well-structured code that
is scalable.

```rust
mod to_do;

use to_do::structs::done::Done;
use to_do::structs::pending::Pending;

fn main() {
    let done: Done = Done::new("shopping");
    println!("{}", done.super_struct.title);
    println!("{}", done.super_struct.status);

    let pending: Pending = Pending::new("laundry");
    println!("{}", pending.super_struct.title);
    println!("{}", pending.super_struct.status);
}
```

In the code above, a module is defined and then the two structs are imported.
After that in the main function the structs are defined and printed.

This is useful, however, as the program grows, we could end up with long import
lists as we import every public struct that the module houses. This is not
scalable either. If we need to use our module in another module, we would also
have to rewrite a lot of imports. Other developers might also implement our
module incorrectly. In order to prevent these problems from happening, we can
build an interface.

## Managing structs with factories

We can build our interface with the **factory pattern**. This is where we select
the right struct based on the input, build it, and return it. This can be done
in the `to_do/mod.rs` file:

```rust
pub mod structs;

use structs::done::Done;
use structs::pending::Pending;

pub enum ItemTypes {
    Pending(Pending),
    Done(Done)
}

pub fn to_do_factory(item_type: &str, item_title: &str) -> Result<ItemTypes, &'static str> {
    if item_type == "pending" {
        let pending_item = Pending::new(item_title);
        Ok(ItemTypes::Pending(pending_item))
    }
    else if item_type == "done" {
        let done_item = Done::new(item_title);
        Ok(ItemTypes::Done(done_item))
    }
    else {
        Err("this is not accepted")
    }
}
```

Here, we lock down the structs by removing the pub definition as we will only
allow it to be used via the interface, which is the `to_do_factory` function. In
this function, we check the input type and build the struct depending on that
type. We also package an error if we pass in a type that we do not have. We can
also see that we have used an enum to enable the return of the two types of
items.

At this point, there is a refactoring opportunity. It could be argued that we
only needed one struct, and that the type could be handled in the factory,
reducing the need for multiple structs. This is a true observation. However,
we do plan to start adding traits to our structs. Right now, the multiple
structs might seem a little excessive, but we have to maintain flexibility
in our code.

Now that the interface is defined, it can be used in the main function.

```rust
mod to_do;

use to_do::ItemTypes;
use to_do::to_do_factory;

fn main() {
    let to_do_item: Result<ItemTypes, &'static str> = to_do_factory("pending", "make");

    match to_do_item.unwrap() {
        ItemTypes::Pending(item) => println!(
            "it's a pending item with the title: {}", item.super_struct.title),

        ItemTypes::Done(item) => println!(
            "it's a done item with the title: {}", item.super_struct.title),
    }
}
```

It is best to keep the logic surrounding the definition and construction of
to-do items in its own module.
