# 1.3 Finding Duplicate Lines

```go
// Dup prints the text of each line that appears more
// than once in the standard input, preceeded by its count.
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"fmt"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	input := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)
	for input.Scan() {
		counts[input.Text()]++
	}
	// NOTE: ignoring potential errors from input.Err()
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}
```

A `map` holds a set of key/value pairs and provides constant-time operations to store, retrieve, or test for an item in the set. The key may be of any type whose values can be compared with `==`, strings being the most common example; the value may be of any type at all. The built in function `make` creates a new empty map; it has other uses too.

When a map does not contain a certain key and you try to access that key, Go will return the default value for that type. For example, if you have a map with `string` keys and `int` values, if you try to access a key that does not exist, like `test`, you will get `0`, which is the default value for integers.

```go
fmt.Println(myMap["test"])
// prints: 0
```

The order of map iteration is not specified, but in practice it is random, varying from one run to another. This design is intentional, since it prevents programs from relying on any particular ordering where none is guaranteed. 

The `bufio` package helps make input and output efficient and convenient. One of its most useful features is a type called `Scanner` that reads input and breaks it into lines or words; it's often the easiest way to process input that comes naturally in lines.

The program uses a short variable declaration to create a new variable `input` that refers to a `bufio.Scanner`:

```go
input := bufio.Scanner(os.Stdin)
```

The `Scanner` reads from the program's standard input. Each call to `input.Scan()` reads the next line and removes the new line character from the end; the result can be retrieved by calling `input.Text()`. The `Scan()` function returns true if there is a new line and false when there is no more input. 

#### Conversion Characters

%d formats an integer operand using decimal notation

%s expands to the value of a string operand

%x, %o, %b integer in hexadecimal, octal, binary

%f, %g, e% floating-point number: 3.141593 3.141592653589793 3.141593e+00

%t boolean

%c rune (Unicode code point)

%q quoted string "abc" or run 'c'

%v any value in a natural format

%T type of any value

%% literal percent sign (no operand)

The next version of `dup.go` can read from the standard input or handle a list of fine names, using `os.Open` to open each one:

```go
// Dup2 prints the count and text of lines that appear more than once
// in the input. It reads from stdin or from a list of named files.
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"fmt"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	files := os.Args[1:]
	if len(files) == 0 {
		countLines(os.Stdin, counts)
	} else {
		for _, arg := range files {
			f, err := os.Open(arg)
			if err != nil {
				fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "dup2: %v\n", err)
				continue
			}
			countLines(f, counts)
			f.Close()
		}
	}
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}

func countLines(f *os.File, counts map[string]int) {
	input := bufio.NewScanner(f)
	for input.Scan() {
		counts[input.Text()]++
	}
	// NOTE: ignoring potential errors from input.Err()
}
```

The functions `os.Open` returns two values. The first is an open file (*os.File) that is used in subsequent reads by the `Scanner`.

The second result of `os.Open` is a value of the built-in `error` type. If `err` equals the special built-in value `nil`, the file was opened successfully. The file is read, and when the end of the input is reached, `Close` closes the file and releases any resources. On the other hand, if `err` is not `nil`, something went wrong. In that case, the error value describes the problem. We print the error message on the standard error stream using `Fprintf` and the verb `%v`, which displays a value of any type in the default format, and our program then carries on with the next file; the `continue` statement goes to the next iteration of the enclosing for loop.

Notice that the call to `countLines` precedes its declaration. Functions and other package-level entities may be declared in any order.

A map is a *reference* to the data structure created by `make`. When a map is passed to a function, the function receives a copy of the reference, so any changes the called function makes to the underlying data structure will be visible through the caller's map reference too.

The versions of dup above operate in a "streaming" mode, in which input is read and broken into lines as needed, so in principle these programs can handle an arbitrary amount of input. An alternative approach is to read the entire input into memory in one big gulp, split it into lines all at once, then process the lines. The following version, dup3, operates in that fashion. It introduces the function `ReadFile` (from the `io/ioutil` package), which reads the entire contents of a named file, and `strings.Split`, which splits a string into a slice of substrings. (`Split` is the opposite of `strings.Join`, which we saw earlier).

```go
// dup3 reads the whole file into memory
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"io/ioutil"
	"os"
	"strings"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	for _, filename := range os.Args[1:] {
		data, err := ioutil.ReadFile(filename)
		if err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "dup3: %v\n", err)
			continue
		}
		for _, line := range strings.Split(string(data), "\n") {
			counts[line]++
		}
	}
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}
```

`ReadFile` returns a byte slice that must be converted into a `string` so it can be split by `strings.Split`.

Under the covers, `bufio.Scanner`, `ioutil.ReadFile`, and `ioutil.WriteFile` use the `Read` and `Write` methods of `*os.File`, but it's rare that most programmers need to access those lower-level routines directly. The higher